README.md, before:

# CollectionMerger

[![NuGet](https://img.shields.io/nuget/v/CollectionMerger.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/CollectionMerger/)
[![NuGet Downloads](https://img.shields.io/nuget/dt/CollectionMerger.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/CollectionMerger/)
[![CI](https://github.com/alexdresko/collection-merger/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/alexdresko/collection-merger/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

Synchronize/merge collections while generating a **change report** (added/updated/removed), including **nested collection** merges.

- Targets: `net8.0`, `net9.0`, `net10.0`
- Main entry point: `CollectionSyncExtensions.MapFrom(...)`
- Output: `SyncReport` with a list of `ChangeRecord` items

## Installation

### .NET CLI

```bash
dotnet add package CollectionMerger
```

### Package Manager

```powershell
Install-Package CollectionMerger
```

### PackageReference

```xml
<PackageReference Include="CollectionMerger" Version="x.y.z" />
```

## Getting started

You merge a source collection into a destination collection by providing:

- `matchPredicate`: how to match a source item to an existing destination item (usually by an ID)
- `mapProperties`: how to copy/update properties from source to destination

```csharp
using CollectionMerger;

var destination = new List<Person>
{
    new() { Id = 1, Name = "Alice" },
    new() { Id = 2, Name = "Bob" }
};

var source = new List<PersonDto>
{
    new() { Id = 1, Name = "Alice Updated" },
    new() { Id = 3, Name = "Charlie" }
};

var report = destination.MapFrom(
    source: source,
    matchPredicate: (src, dest) => src.Id == dest.Id,
    mapProperties: (src, dest, _m) =>
    {
        dest.Id = src.Id;
        dest.Name = src.Name;
    });

Console.WriteLine($"Added: {report.AddedCount}, Updated: {report.UpdatedCount}, Removed: {report.RemovedCount}");
```

## Examples

### Nested collections (people + cats)

For nested collections, call `MapFrom(...)` on the child collection and pass the parent `Mapper` so paths get nested.

```csharp
using CollectionMerger;

var report = destinationPeople.MapFrom(
    source: sourcePeople,
    matchPredicate: (srcPerson, destPerson) => srcPerson.ID == destPerson.ID,
    mapProperties: (srcPerson, destPerson, m1) =>
    {
        destPerson.ID = srcPerson.ID;
        destPerson.Name = srcPerson.Name;

        destPerson.Cats.MapFrom(
            parent: m1,
            source: srcPerson.Cats,
            matchPredicate: (srcCat, destCat) => srcCat.ID == destCat.ID,
            mapProperties: (srcCat, destCat, _m2) =>
            {
                destCat.ID = srcCat.ID;
                destCat.Name = srcCat.Name;
            });
    });
```

### Inspecting changes

```csharp
foreach (var change in report.Changes)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"{change.ChangeType}: {change.Path}");

    if (change.PropertyChanges is null)
        continue;

    foreach (var prop in change.PropertyChanges)
        Console.WriteLine($"  - {prop.PropertyName}: '{prop.OldValue}' -> '{prop.NewValue}'");
}
```

## What the report contains

`SyncReport.Changes` contains `ChangeRecord` entries:

- `ChangeType`: `Added`, `Updated`, or `Removed`
- `Path`: a stable-ish path for the item (supports nesting)
- `Item`: the destination item instance
- `PropertyChanges`: only present for `Updated`

## FAQ

### How are item paths created?

Paths look like `Person[1]` and `Person[1].Cat[3]`.

The `[...]` value is chosen by looking for a public readable `ID` or `Id` property on either the source or destination item. If neither exists, it becomes `?`.

### What counts as an update?

After your `mapProperties` delegate runs, CollectionMerger snapshots public instance scalar properties (excluding enumerables except `string`) and records an `Updated` change if any of those values differ.

### Are collections compared automatically?

No. Collection properties are ignored for property change detection.
If you want nested changes, perform nested merges with the nested overload of `MapFrom(...)`.

### What are the requirements?

- Destination must be an `ICollection<TDestination>`
- `TDestination` must have a parameterless constructor (`new()` constraint)
- Matching behavior is entirely defined by your `matchPredicate` (make sure it uniquely identifies items)

## Feedback / issues

If you hit a bug or want to request a feature, please open an issue:
https://github.com/alexdresko/collection-merger/issues

## Development (this repo)

### Releasing

This repo publishes to NuGet when you push a tag like `v1.2.3`.

- Bump version + tag + push (PowerShell):
  - `./scripts/Release-Version.ps1 -Version 1.2.3`

### GitHub setup

The release workflow expects a GitHub Actions secret:

- `NUGET_API_KEY`: a NuGet.org API key with permission to push packages.

Commit message:

chore: migrate to Release Please automation
Deprecates manual CI and release workflows in favor of Release Please automation.

Removes build/test/publish logic from ci.yml and release.yml, replacing them with deprecation notices that point to the new workflows (netcore.yml and release-please.yml).

Updates documentation to reflect the new release process using Conventional Commits and automated changelog generation. Removes the manual versioning script instructions.

Updates CI badge in README to point to the active netcore.yml workflow.

README.md, after:

# CollectionMerger

[![NuGet](https://img.shields.io/nuget/v/CollectionMerger.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/CollectionMerger/)
[![NuGet Downloads](https://img.shields.io/nuget/dt/CollectionMerger.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/CollectionMerger/)
[![CI](https://github.com/alexdresko/collection-merger/actions/workflows/netcore.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/alexdresko/collection-merger/actions/workflows/netcore.yml)

Synchronize/merge collections while generating a **change report** (added/updated/removed), including **nested collection** merges.

- Targets: `net8.0`, `net9.0`, `net10.0`
- Main entry point: `CollectionSyncExtensions.MapFrom(...)`
- Output: `SyncReport` with a list of `ChangeRecord` items

See [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) for release history.

## Installation

### .NET CLI

```bash
dotnet add package CollectionMerger
```

### Package Manager

```powershell
Install-Package CollectionMerger
```

### PackageReference

```xml
<PackageReference Include="CollectionMerger" Version="x.y.z" />
```

## Getting started

You merge a source collection into a destination collection by providing:

- `matchPredicate`: how to match a source item to an existing destination item (usually by an ID)
- `mapProperties`: how to copy/update properties from source to destination

```csharp
using CollectionMerger;

var destination = new List<Person>
{
    new() { Id = 1, Name = "Alice" },
    new() { Id = 2, Name = "Bob" }
};

var source = new List<PersonDto>
{
    new() { Id = 1, Name = "Alice Updated" },
    new() { Id = 3, Name = "Charlie" }
};

var report = destination.MapFrom(
    source: source,
    matchPredicate: (src, dest) => src.Id == dest.Id,
    mapProperties: (src, dest, _m) =>
    {
        dest.Id = src.Id;
        dest.Name = src.Name;
    });

Console.WriteLine($"Added: {report.AddedCount}, Updated: {report.UpdatedCount}, Removed: {report.RemovedCount}");
```

## Examples

### Nested collections (people + cats)

For nested collections, call `MapFrom(...)` on the child collection and pass the parent `Mapper` so paths get nested.

```csharp
using CollectionMerger;

var report = destinationPeople.MapFrom(
    source: sourcePeople,
    matchPredicate: (srcPerson, destPerson) => srcPerson.ID == destPerson.ID,
    mapProperties: (srcPerson, destPerson, m1) =>
    {
        destPerson.ID = srcPerson.ID;
        destPerson.Name = srcPerson.Name;

        destPerson.Cats.MapFrom(
            parent: m1,
            source: srcPerson.Cats,
            matchPredicate: (srcCat, destCat) => srcCat.ID == destCat.ID,
            mapProperties: (srcCat, destCat, _m2) =>
            {
                destCat.ID = srcCat.ID;
                destCat.Name = srcCat.Name;
            });
    });
```

### Inspecting changes

```csharp
foreach (var change in report.Changes)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"{change.ChangeType}: {change.Path}");

    if (change.PropertyChanges is null)
        continue;

    foreach (var prop in change.PropertyChanges)
        Console.WriteLine($"  - {prop.PropertyName}: '{prop.OldValue}' -> '{prop.NewValue}'");
}
```

## What the report contains

`SyncReport.Changes` contains `ChangeRecord` entries:

- `ChangeType`: `Added`, `Updated`, or `Removed`
- `Path`: a stable-ish path for the item (supports nesting)
- `Item`: the destination item instance
- `PropertyChanges`: only present for `Updated`

## FAQ

### How are item paths created?

Paths look like `Person[1]` and `Person[1].Cat[3]`.

The `[...]` value is chosen by looking for a public readable `ID` or `Id` property on either the source or destination item. If neither exists, it becomes `?`.

### What counts as an update?

After your `mapProperties` delegate runs, CollectionMerger snapshots public instance scalar properties (excluding enumerables except `string`) and records an `Updated` change if any of those values differ.

### Are collections compared automatically?

No. Collection properties are ignored for property change detection.
If you want nested changes, perform nested merges with the nested overload of `MapFrom(...)`.

### What are the requirements?

- Destination must be an `ICollection<TDestination>`
- `TDestination` must have a parameterless constructor (`new()` constraint)
- Matching behavior is entirely defined by your `matchPredicate` (make sure it uniquely identifies items)

## Feedback / issues

If you hit a bug or want to request a feature, please open an issue:
https://github.com/alexdresko/collection-merger/issues

## Development (this repo)

### Releasing

Releases are automated via Release Please.

- Merge changes into `main` using Conventional Commits.
- Release Please will open/maintain a release PR updating `CHANGELOG.md` and package version.
- Merging the release PR creates the GitHub Release + publishes to NuGet.

### GitHub setup

The release workflow expects a GitHub Actions secret:

- `NUGET_API_KEY` (or `NUGET_TOKEN`): a NuGet.org API key with permission to push packages.
